The three types of data visualization
Selecting transcript lines in this section will navigate to timestamp in the video
- [Instructor] In this segment, we're going to be talking about the three types of data visualization. Those data visualization types are data storytelling, data showcasing, and data art. Data storytelling is the type of data visualization you would create for generating presentations that you would use to present to organizational decision makers. Data showcasing is the type of data visualization you would be making for generating presentations for analysts, scientists, mathematicians, and engineers. Lastly, data art is the type of data visualization you would create for presentations when you're presenting to activists or the general public at large. Data art is pretty effective in these cases. In this section of the course, we're just going to go through each of the different areas and get them really well-defined for you so that you can use them effectively across your career. Diving into data storytelling first, the purpose of data storytelling is to make it easy for your audience to really understand the point you're trying to make with the data visualization. You need them to understand the point you're making with your data visualization, and you want them to be able to understand that within 10 to 15 seconds of looking at the graphic. If they have to study it for longer than that, you're going to lose their attention. That and your data visualization needs to be clutter-free and highly focused. Again, you have to think about your intended audience when you're creating a data visualization. In these cases, when you are generating data storytelling pieces, your audience is going to be comprised mostly of non analysts and non-technical business managers, decision makers and leaders. They do not want to wade through a bunch of clutter and a bunch of details that they don't need to make a conclusion. They want you to tell them your findings within the data and basically show that in a visual manner. When you're creating a data storytelling product that would be in the form of something like a static image or a very simple interactive dashboard, maybe something that you would create in an application like Xcelsius by SAP. In this course, you're going to be learning how to use a library called Streamlink to create interactive data visualizations. This slide demonstrates a great example of data storytelling. If you look at this example here, you should be able to understand what the graphic is telling you within about five seconds. The headline says, "What's really warming the air?" Obviously, they're talking about global warming, and there is a simple line chart with a trend that's increasing. Basically, without even thinking, you can tell that whoever produced this data storytelling piece is trying to tell you that there's an increase in global warming. Do you see how simple that is to analyze and understand? You want to make sure that your data storytelling products are also simple and easy to understand in this way. Now, let's look at data showcasing. Data Showcasing is where you showcase a lot of data so that your audience members can think for themselves. This is an opposition to what you do with data storytelling. Data storytelling is where you present your findings in a very, very clear and easy to understand way. When you do data showcasing, the audience is actually looking to draw conclusions for themselves. To that end, you need to make sure that your data visualization is highly contextual, that you've included all sorts of background information to help people in your audience draw their own conclusions. The data visualization should be open-ended. In other words, you are not telling them your findings, but allowing them to think for themselves. The intended audience for data showcasing products would be analysts, quants, engineers, mathematicians, scientists, basically people with an analytical mindset, background in that, because this is the kind of thing that's going to be of value to them. In terms of product types, when you are doing data showcasing, you'll be producing static images and interactive dashboards, and you're going to learn how to do both of these things throughout the remainder of this course. Here's an example of data showcasing. I actually took this example from my book, "Data Science for Dummies." You can see that here, there's a lot of data that's being showcased on one screen. You could probably spend 15 minutes visually exploring this data visualization, looking for trends, patterns, and correlations. You could come away from this with many, many different types of hypotheses. Data showcasing is a good tool for exploratory data analysis and for allowing other analysts to do exploratory data analysis on a visual basis without them actually having to get in and generate that data visualization for themselves. It's a great presentation tool. Lastly, let's look at data art. You can use data art to make a statement. Most data art is used in something like data journalism, or if you're trying to get your community or a community of activists to be engaged in taking action, then you would benefit by generating a piece of art that's based on data. Something that's really riveting and inspiring or provoking to get them to have an opinion and take action based on the data you're presenting them through the artwork. Your data visualization should be attention-getting and creative, if not controversial, because the more controversial it is, the more action you're likely to inspire. Intended audiences for data art tend to be people like idealists, dreamers, artists, and social activists. Data art is a tool to educate, inform, and motivate the public in most cases. In terms of product types, data art is almost always produced as static images. In some cases, it's also produced as an interactive data piece on the internet. Static data visualizations are generally sufficient here though. Here's an example of data art that I took from periscopic.com. If you're like most people, then you look at this example for about 10 to 15 seconds and you understand exactly what it's trying to say. It's saying that US gun laws need to change. This data art is attempting to get people to rally up against the Second Amendment and get gun laws tightened up in America. It's using data art to achieve that goal. As you can see here on the left, you've got an account for the number of people killed, and that's 9,595 people as highlighted in orange. Then on the right side of this example, you see that they have actually counted up an approximation of the number of years that were lost from those lives, from those people that were killed. What they're really trying to do in this piece is that they're trying to numerically exaggerate the detrimental impact that US gun laws have upon the population as a whole. In order to do that, they're breaking down the number of people killed to the number of years of life that's been lost. It's clear that they really want to rally up people in a political way and get them to take action against a Second Amendment. By exaggerating impact, they're looking for ways to amplify that impact as much as possible by using a metric that's got the highest number possible. In this case, it's number of years of life lost because of the gun laws. Then if you look here under the title, it's not the number of years of life lost. They call it stolen. They're really trying to impassion people to take action against gun laws. They're saying, okay, people's lives are being stolen here. In fact, that may or may not be true because a lot of times death from guns happen as a result of deliberate criminal activity that a person chooses to participate in despite its high risk nature. If a person dies via a gunshot wound in this case, is that truly a life stolen? It's up for you to decide. What's presented in this visualization is a matter of perspective. Whoever created this is really trying to push people in their audience to get out and change gun laws. They're infusing their opinions in order to get that done, but they're using data art as a way to drive impact.



the video “The three types of data visualization” covers essential concepts that can be particularly useful in your journey towards becoming a Machine Learning Engineer. Here are the key takeaways:

Data Storytelling is aimed at non-technical audiences like business managers and decision-makers. The goal is to present data in a clear, concise manner that conveys a specific message or finding within seconds, without overwhelming the audience with unnecessary details.

Data Showcasing targets a more technical audience, such as analysts and engineers. It presents data in a more open-ended manner, allowing the audience to draw their own conclusions. This type is rich in context and encourages exploratory data analysis.

Data Art is designed to engage and provoke thought among the general public or activists. It uses visually striking presentations to make a statement or inspire action on social issues. It's characterized by creativity and sometimes controversy to grab attention and convey a powerful message.


Understanding these types will help you create more effective visualizations tailored to your audience's needs, a crucial skill in data science and machine learning projects.

