Introduction to Streamlit

Sure, let's simplify the topic of Streamlit for you:

Streamlit is a tool that helps you create web apps for data science and machine learning projects quickly and easily. You don't need to know web development to use it.
It works only with Python and supports all major Python plotting libraries like Matplotlib and Seaborn.
Streamlit is open-source, meaning it's free to use and you can modify it as needed.
It's very user-friendly and requires minimal coding to create powerful data applications.

Comparison with Other Tools:

Panel: Similar to Streamlit but allows you to use Jupyter Notebooks to create web apps.
Voila: Converts Jupyter Notebooks into web apps but has limited design options.
Dash: Also used for creating data apps but requires some knowledge of HTML.

Why Use Streamlit?

Ideal for quickly building dashboards for non-technical users.
Easy to set up and deploy on various servers.

I hope this makes it clearer!


Selecting transcript lines in this section will navigate to timestamp in the video
- [Instructor] Streamlit, Dash, Voila, and Panel are the leading frameworks within the Python dashboarding ecosystem. Let's discuss the features of these frameworks. I'll state a design assumption. Then we'll decide which framework is best for that assumption. Streamlit is a Python library that's specifically built for machine learning engineers and data scientists. Streamlit makes it easy to create and share beautiful custom web apps for machine learning and data science projects even if you don't have any prior knowledge of web development. in the matter of a few minutes, you can use it to build and deploy powerful data applications. Some of the primary features of this framework are it only supports Python language. It supports all of the Python plotting libraries like Matplotlib, Seaborn, Plotly, what have you. Another nice thing about Streamlit is it's an open source framework. We do not need any web development knowledge to build a web application using Streamlit, and it's also incredibly easy to use and manage, requiring very, very little bit of code. It runs on its own server and it doesn't support Jupyter Notebook, but it can be deployed on most of the deployment servers. Next, there's Panel. Panel is another Python library that lets you create custom, interactive web apps and dashboards by connecting user-defined widgets to plots, images, tables, or text. The best thing about Panel is that you can build a simple dashboard application for a complicated system in Jupyter Notebook, and you don't need to switch tools along the way. Here are some of the main features of Panel. Just like Streamlit, Panel also supports Python language. It supports all of the main Python Ploting libraries like Matplotlib, Seaborn, and others. It's an open source framework and it can be used to create multi-page web applications. A nice thing about Panel is we don't need any web development knowledge to create web applications using it. Panel offers amazing design flexibility, and you can use it to create your templates as well. It supports Jupyter Notebooks, and with it you can create an end-to-end application within a notebook environment. Lastly, Panel can easily be deployed to most deployment platforms. Next, there's Voila. Voila is a tool that lets you turn any Jupyter Notebook into a standalone web application. It allows you to create interactive web pages, and it has great support for widgets, such as IPyWidgets. Here are some of the more prominent features of Voila. It supports multiple languages, such as Python, C++, and Julia. It also supports most of the Python plotting libraries. It's an open source framework and you don't need any web development knowledge to create web applications using Voila. Voila makes it really easy to create basic dashboards, but unfortunately it has limited design flexibility. It only offers a few templates, but it does give you an option to create your own templates. The nice thing about Voila is it has exceptional support for Jupyter Notebooks. Lastly, Voila can be easily deployed to most of the deployment servers. And last but not least, there's Dash. Dash is a web application development framework from Plotly. It's built specifically for developing data applications. Dash offers users a very easy way of developing dynamic dashboards. Some of its main features are that it supports Python, R, and Julia languages. Dash is primarily built for using with Python's Plotly Library. It explicitly supports multi-page web applications, and it's an open source framework. That said, basic knowledge of HTML is needed for developing a web application. It's really easy to create a basic dashboard application using Dash and Dash offers incredible design flexibility. Unfortunately, though it doesn't provide any support for Jupyter Notebooks. One more thing about Dash is that it's got plenty of deployment options and can be deployed on most of the deployment servers. Now, let's assume we need to develop a dashboard for a non-technical audience. In this case, Streamlit would be an ideal data dashboarding solution simply because it's more simple and structured than other options. If you're looking for a more mature data dashboarding solution and your primary goal is to develop dashboards for non-technical users, then Streamlit should be your choice. Moving forward, we'll get started working with Streamlit and exploring its features.